docs: add Python packages how-to (#36)
canonical/charmtech-charmlibs: _docs/how-to/python-package.md

This is probably sufficient for early prototyping and internal use.
If you push git tags for releases or do releases on GitHub, you could point to the exact release tag, e.g. `@v2.18.1`.
Another approach which could be useful for prototyping would be to pin on a branch,
e.g. `stable/candidate/beta/edge`, `dev/main`, `v0/v1/v2`, etc.
These approaches may be useful as your library stabilises internally, but if you find yourself thinking about a scheme like this,
it’s probably a sign to switch to PyPI and use semantic versioning.

If your package is in a subdirectory of your repository
(for example if you use a monorepo,
or collect your libraries into a single repository
-- or if you’re just developing in an existing repository while prototyping):

```
ops-testing @ git+https://github.com/canonical/operator@main#subdirectory=testing
```

If you're using `pyproject.toml` (recommended!):

```toml
[project]
dependencies = [
  “ops-testing @ git+https://github.com/canonical/operator@main#subdirectory=testing”,
]
```

For `poetry` see [here](https://python-poetry.org/docs/dependency-specification/#git-dependencies).

(python-package-distribution-local)=

> ### Local Files

Author: I'm not sure about this section. My main concern is that I don't think we need to be pushing people to distribute their internal libraries the same way that we want to distribute general use charm libraries.

> (how-to-python-package)=

Author: You can see the built version of this page [here](https://canonical-charmlibs--36.com.readthedocs.build/how-to/python-package/#).

The package name should be `charmlibs-$libname`,
imported as `from charmlibs import $libname`
(or `import charmlibs.$libname as $libname` if you're stuck on an older `pyright` version that complains about the other form).

The package should be a [namespace package](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/packaging-namespace-packages/)
using the `charmlibs` namespace.
All this means is that your actual package is nested under an empty directory named `charmlibs`.
Your file structure would look like `src/charmlibs/$libname/__init__.py`.
There is no need to install the actual package named `charmlibs`.
It exists on PyPI solely to reserve the package name as a namespace for charm libraries,
and to aid charm library discoverability.

If you have a dedicated repository for the charmlib, we recommend naming it `charmlibs-$libname` as well.
For repositories containing several libraries, consider `$teamname-charmlibs`,
with the individual packages following the naming and namespace recommendations.
These naming  recommendations do not apply to other repository organisation schemes,
but we still recomend the `charmlibs` namespace if your library is intended for public use.

> We don’t recommend using the `ops` or `charm` namespace for your charm libraries distributed as Python packages.

Author: I've tried to streamline this. Built docs [here](https://canonical-charmlibs--36.com.readthedocs.build/how-to/python-package/#naming-and-namespacing-your-python-package).

It will be easier for charmers to follow your code if the `ops` namespace is reserved for the `ops` package.
Likewise, the `charms` namespace is best left for charmcraft managed libs.

If your library is only intended to be used by your own charms,
for example if you write a library to be used by the machine and Kubernetes versions of your charm,
releasing a package on PyPI using this naming scheme may not be the right approach,

> as you don't necessarily want to advertise the library for public consumption.

Reviewer: This is a lot of words and takes a while to get to the point. How about:

"If your library should only be used by your own charms, you don't need to publish it to PyPI."

And should this be in the next section? Or is this kind of leading to the next section?

Author: Good call, thanks. I've made the connection with the following section more explicit.

(python-package-distribution)=
## How to distribute your Python package

> Distributing your package on PyPI has the most benefits.

Reviewer: Benefits for what or whom? It also has drawbacks (having to publish, claim the name, version, etc). I would skip this sentence and state the concrete trade-offs.

However, you may find it useful to begin by distributing your package via a git url during development and internal use.
Using a git dependency
or skipping distribution in favour of packing the local package
may be appropriate if your library is purely for your own charms,
and is not intended for external users.

(python-package-distribution-pypi)=
### PyPI

Use [trusted publishing](https://docs.pypi.org/trusted-publishers/) to publish directly from your github repository.
You can use the [actions/attest-build-provenance](https://github.com/actions/attest-build-provenance)
and [pypa/gh-action-pypi-publish](https://github.com/pypa/gh-action-pypi-publish) actions in your workflows.
Trigger the workflow based on a version tag being pushed.
Feel free to check out this project's workflows for an example.

> Make sure that your repository only allows trusted contributors write access.

Reviewer: I think this starts a bit weakly -- trusted publishing and attestation are optional (especially attestation). What about something more like this:

To publish your charm library on PyPI, create a GitHub workflow triggered by a version tag, for example:

```
# publish.yaml
# simplest possible example
```

You can use [trusted publishing](...) and [attestation](...) if you need them: see the [pathops workflow](...) as an example.

Author: Hmm, I think trusted publishing is actually the simplest way to publish from github these days, and it seems to be recommended as more secure too (see security section at the end of https://docs.pypi.org/trusted-publishers/), so I'm going to stick with recommending that.

I've cleaned up the flow based on your feedback, thanks, and also I learned that the trusted publishing action now does attestations on its own, so I'll have to update the workflows to drop the attestations action. Built docs [here](https://canonical-charmlibs--36.com.readthedocs.build/how-to/python-package/#pypi).

The team manager and another truster team member should be the package owners on PyPI,
using their Canonical email addresses.
Make sure to also claim your package on [Test PyPI](https://test.pypi.org/),
and setup a workflow for publishing there.
All team members can be owners on Test PyPI.

A major benefit of publishing on PyPI is that users of your library can specify version ranges in their dependencies.
Therefore, if you’re going to publish on PyPI, we highly recommend that you use semantic versioning for your library.

A non-dev/alpha/beta/etc qualified 1.x release to PyPI signifies that your library is ready for public consumption.
You should also communicate this through the ["Development Status" Trove classifier](https://pypi.org/classifiers/) in your `pyproject.toml`.

(python-package-distribution-git)=
### Git

You can get started by distributing your library as a Python package with very little friction using GitHub.

> This is good for prototyping, or when first transitioning from a charm-lib to a Python package,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is good for prototyping, or when first transitioning from a charmcraft-style library to a Python package,
```

and may be a good fit for libraries that are intended for team-internal use.

> Once you’re done prototyping and the library is ready for external users, you’ll want to start using PyPI instead.

Reviewer: I would weaken or remove this, because there's still a pretty reasonable case that team-internal libraries just stay on GitHub. We can present the trade-offs (you list many below regarding versioning) and let them make the call.

Git dependencies are limited in that they don’t allow for sophisticated dependency resolution.
You can only specify an exact reference (tag, commit, or branch).
You can’t specify a version range.
This is problematic if your library has dependencies,
as having to request a specific version of your library makes it more likely that any dependency clashes will require manual intervention.
It becomes even more problematic if your library may be depended on by other charm libraries.
Requesting an exact hash or a branch tip may be sufficient for team-internal projects and prototyping,
but proper versioning support is critical when sharing your library more widely,
which will require promoting your package to PyPI.

> Tools that scan for security vulnerabilities may also struggle with such dependencies.

Reviewer: The above paragraph is a lot. Can we tighten it or break it up somehow?

Author: I've trimmed this down a lot and moved it to after the (now shorter) explanation of what references you can pin on.

You’ll need to include git in your charm’s build dependencies to use a GitHub-hosted library in your charm:

```yaml
parts:
  charm:
    build-packages: [git]
```

Then you can specify the dependency in your requirements like this:

```

> ops @ git+https://github.com/canonical/operator@main

Reviewer: Would it be better to present a `charmlibs` example using the naming suggested above? Using `ops` here seems a bit confusing in this context.

```

If you don’t specify a branch or tag, it will default to `main`.

> This is probably sufficient for early prototyping and internal use.

Reviewer: This sentence seems a bit repetitive with the above.

If you push git tags for releases or do releases on GitHub, you could point to the exact release tag, e.g. `@v2.18.1`.
Another approach which could be useful for prototyping would be to pin on a branch,
e.g. `stable/candidate/beta/edge`, `dev/main`, `v0/v1/v2`, etc.
These approaches may be useful as your library stabilises internally, but if you find yourself thinking about a scheme like this,

> it’s probably a sign to switch to PyPI and use semantic versioning.

Reviewer: I wonder if this is too much information. I think we can leave this to their imagination -- we don't need to specify or bring up everything.

If your package is in a subdirectory of your repository
(for example if you use a monorepo,
or collect your libraries into a single repository
-- or if you’re just developing in an existing repository while prototyping):

```

> ops-testing @ git+https://github.com/canonical/operator@main#subdirectory=testing

Reviewer: Again, I think we should give an example that's more charmlibs-specific.

```

> If you're using `pyproject.toml` (recommended!):

Reviewer: I don't think we need to add the pyproject syntax, as it's really the same dependency syntax as above. Same with Poetry.

Author: I've dropped the big `pyproject.toml` example, but the syntax is different with `poetry`, and different again with `uv`, so I've briefly mentioned them.

]
```

For `poetry` see [here](https://python-poetry.org/docs/dependency-specification/#git-dependencies).

(python-package-distribution-local)=
### Local Files

If you're developing a Python package in the same repository as your charm(s),
it may be simplest to skip distribution and use the local files when packing the charm.
This way, assuming a freshly checked out copy of the repository,
the git commit fully specifies the contents of both your charm code and the package.
For example, if you had the following structure:

```
$repo/
    $charm/
        src/charm.py
        pyproject.toml
    $package/
        src/charmlibs/$libname/__init__.py
        pyproject.toml
```

Then you could leave `$package` out of your `$charm/pyproject.toml` during development.

To provision a development virtual environment in `$repo` you could `uv venv` and then `uv pip install -e ./$charm -e ./$package`.
Using editable installs ensures that the virtual environment reflects all changes made to either `$charm` or `$package`.
To provision a development virtual environment in `$charm` you could `uv sync` and then `uv pip install -e ../$package`.

> Since `$package` doesn't depend on `$charm`, its development virtual environment doesn't require any special commands, just a `uv sync`.

Reviewer: I think these would be better as a couple of multi-line bash blocks like you have below. Describe what you're going to do, "you could use what's called an [editable install](...):" and then present the couple of lines. It gets lost a bit in the paragraph format.

When it comes time to pack `$charm` for a release or testing, you could do something like this:

```bash
cp -r ./$charm ./pack-$charm
cp -r ./$package ./pack-$charm/
cd ./pack-$charm
uv add ./$package
charmcraft pack
```

The approach should be the same if you have multiple charms, (for example) `$charm-kubernetes` and `$charm-machine`, or even multiple packages.

(python-package-deps)=
## Dependencies

> Declare `~=` the lowest `2.X` `ops` version that you support.

Reviewer: I struggle to parse this sentence. Maybe "When you declare `ops` as a dependency, use `ops~=2.15`, where 2.15 is the lowest `ops` version you support. This is equivalent to `ops>=2.15,==2.*`, protecting you against breaking changes in a future Ops 3.x."

Author: I've decided it's probably cleaner to recommend `>=2.X,<3` as this avoids the footgun of `~=2.X.Y` meaning `>=2.X.Y,==2.X.*` (locking you into that minor release).

```
charmlibs-pathops @ git+https://github.com/canonical/charmtech-charmlibs@main#subdirectory=pathops
```

You can specify any branch, tag, or commit after the `@`.
If you leave it off, it will default to `@main`.
You can’t specify a version range.
This can make dependency resolution problematic for users,
especially if your library is depended on by other charm libraries.
Tools that scan versions for security vulnerabilities may also struggle with such dependencies.

If your package is in a subdirectory of your repository,
for example in a monorepo (like `charmlibs-pathops`),
or when developing libraries alongside charms,
you'll need to specify the subdirectory.
If your library has a dedicated repository,
leave off the subdirectory and it will default to the repository root.

In `pyproject.toml`, quote the entire string above in your dependencies list,
or use `uv add git+...` to have `uv` add `charmlibs-pathops` to your dependencies list,
and the git referece to `tool.uv.sources`.
For `poetry` see [here](https://python-poetry.org/docs/dependency-specification/#git-dependencies).

(python-package-distribution-local)=

> ### Local Files

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Local files
```

cp -r ./$package ./pack-$charm/
cd ./pack-$charm
uv add ./$package
charmcraft pack
```

To provision virtual environments for development (including linting and unit testing) we can use editable installs.
For a `$repo` wide virtual environment for conveniently working on both `$package` and `$charm`, you could do this:
```bash
cd $repo
uv venv
uv pip install -e ./$charm -e ./$package
```
Using editable installs ensures that the virtual environment reflects all changes made to either `$charm` or `$package`.
You can then point your editor to the python interpreter in `.venv`, or [activate it manually](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html#how-venvs-work).
To create a virtual environment with a specific python version, use the `--python` flag or define it in a `$repo` level `pyproject.toml`.
If you take this approach, a `$repo` level `pyproject.toml` is a good place to put your common dev dependencies like `ruff` and `codespell`.
You can remove the created `.venv` directory to start afresh.

If you wanted a virtual environment for `$charm` specifically, you could do:
```bash
cd $charm
uv sync  # install deps from $charm/pyproject.toml
uv pip install -e ../$package
```

> Since `$package` doesn't depend on `$charm`, its development virtual environment doesn't require any special commands, just a `uv sync`.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand what you mean by "just a `uv sync`". I first thought that this sentence is explaining the previous commands, but perhaps not? Do you mean that if you wanted a separate virtual environment for `$package`, all you'd need to do is run `uv sync` in the `$package` dir?

Author: > Do you mean that if you wanted a separate virtual environment for $package, all you'd need to do is run uv sync in the $package dir?
Yes.

Would this be better?
````suggestion
Since `$package` doesn't depend on `$charm`, its development virtual environment doesn't require an editable install:
```bash
cd $package
uv sync  # install deps from $package/pyproject.toml
```
````

Reviewer 2: Great, an example helps a lot, thanks!

The approach should be the same if you have multiple charms, (for example `$charm-kubernetes` and `$charm-machine`), or multiple packages.

(python-package-deps)=
## Dependencies

Your library is not required to depend on `ops`.
If you do require `ops` as a dependency, specify `ops>=2.X,<3`,
where 2.X is the lowest `ops` version that you support,

> and 3 is the next major version of `ops`,
> protecting your library from breaking changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and 3 is the next major version of `ops`.
This protects your library from breaking changes.
```

(how-to-python-package)=
# How to distribute charm libraries

This guide details when and how you should create your charm libraries as Python packages
(as opposed to {doc}`charmcraft-style charm libs <charmcraft:reference/commands/fetch-libs>`).

(when-to-python-package)=
## When to use a Python package

You should use a Python package for your charm library if:

> - The library relies on any dependencies other than `ops` and the Python standard library.

Author: I'll stick with `ops` here.

> - The library will be difficult to manage as a single file.

Reviewer 3: Maybe this falls under that, but also if the content is too long, since charmcraft or charmhub puts a size limit on it.

Author: Do you know if the size limit is documented anywhere?

- The library isn't logically associated with a single charm.

- You need to share modules between the machine and Kubernetes versions of a charm.

For a relation library,
it may still be worthwhile to use a charmcraft lib,
since the library may be associated with a single charm,
and there is existing infrastructure and documentation supporting this pattern.
However, the reasons listed above should take priority even in this case.

(python-package-name)=
## Naming and namespacing your Python package

For charm libraries intended for public use and distributed as Python packages,
the library should be a [namespace package](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/packaging-namespace-packages/)
using the `charmlibs` namespace.

> The distribution package name should be `charmlibs-$libname`,

Author: Ah, maybe it would. I think I'll leave it with `$libname` for now since I think that looks better in the file structure examples.

> The distribution package name should be `charmlibs-$libname`,

Reviewer 3: Adding a more explicit +1 here for changing to `<foo>` everywhere. I believe it's Canonical style and we're pretty consistent with it elsewhere so it would be nice to stick with it here too.

imported as `from charmlibs import $libname`.

If you have a dedicated repository for the charmlib, we recommend naming it `charmlibs-$libname`.

> For repositories containing several libraries, consider `$teamname-charmlibs`.

Author: Good call
```suggestion
For a repository containing several libraries, consider naming the repository `$teamname-charmlibs`.
```

> Do use `charmlibs` namespace if your library is intended for public use.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Do use the `charmlibs` namespace if your library is intended for public use.
```

Don't use the `ops` or `charm` namespaces for your libraries.
It will be easier for charmers to follow your code if the `ops` namespace is reserved for the `ops` package.
Likewise, the `charms` namespace is best left for charmcraft managed libs.

If your library should only be used by your own charms, you don't need to publish it to PyPI.
In this case, you don't need to use the `charmlibs` namespace either,
but feel free to do so if it's helpful.
The next section suggests alternative distribution methods for this case.

````{tip}
To make a namespace package,
nest your package in an empty directory with the namespace name,
in this case `charmlibs`.
For example, the file structure for your library might look like this:
```
src/
  charmlibs/
    $libname/
      __init__.py
      ...
tests/
  unit/
  integration/
pyproject.toml
```

> The `charmlibs` folder should not contain an `__init__.py` file.

Reviewer 3: I believe this is "must not", not "should not", otherwise it becomes a regular package.

Author: ```suggestion
The `charmlibs` folder must not contain an `__init__.py` file.
```

Likewise, there is no need to install an actual package named `charmlibs`
-- this package does exist on PyPI,
but solely to reserve the package name as a namespace for charm libraries,
and to make charm library documentation easier to find.
````

(python-package-distribution)=
## How to distribute your Python package

Distributing your package on PyPI allows your users to use dependency ranges,
improves discoverability,
and makes it easier for users to install your library.
However, it requires some additional work to publish,
and is most appropriate if your library is intended for public use.

> You may find it useful to begin by distributing your package via a git url during development and team internal use.
> Using a git dependency
> or skipping distribution in favour of packing the local files with your charm
> may be appropriate if your library is purely for your own charms,
> and is not intended for external users.

Reviewer 2: Some small suggestions for readability, including breaking the paragraph at this point:

```suggestion

During development and team internal use, you may find it useful to begin by distributing your package by sharing a git URL.
If your library is purely for your own charms and not intended for external users, it may be appropriate to use a git dependency or pack the local files with your charm.
```

(python-package-distribution-pypi)=
### PyPI

To publish your library on PyPI,
set up [trusted publishing](https://docs.pypi.org/trusted-publishers/) on PyPI,
and create a Github workflow triggered by a version tag.
For example:

<!-- TODO: use exact commits hashes in this workflow example -->
```yaml
# .github/workflows/publish.yaml
on:
  push:
    tags:
      - 'v*.*.*'
jobs:

>   build-n-publish:

Reviewer 3: We should include an environment in our example, as best practice.

Author: ```suggestion
  build-n-publish:
     environment: pypi
```

    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    permissions:
      id-token: write
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
      - uses: astral-sh/setup-uv@v5
      - run: uv build
      - uses: pypa/gh-action-pypi-publish@release/v1
```

> Make sure that your repository only allows trusted contributors write access.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Make sure that your repository only allows write access from trusted contributors.
```

> The team manager and another truster team member should be the package owners on PyPI,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The team manager and another trusted team member should be the package owners on PyPI,
```

using their Canonical email addresses.
Make sure to also claim your package on [Test PyPI](https://test.pypi.org/),
and setup a workflow for publishing there.
All team members can be owners on Test PyPI.

A major benefit of publishing on PyPI is that users of your library can specify version ranges in their dependencies.
Therefore, if you’re going to publish on PyPI, we highly recommend that you use semantic versioning for your library.

> A non-dev/alpha/beta/etc qualified 1.x release to PyPI signifies that your library is ready for public consumption.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A 1.x release to PyPI that isn't qualified with dev/alpha/beta/etc signifies that your library is ready for public consumption.
```

Author: so much better, thanks

You should also communicate this through the ["Development Status" Trove classifier](https://pypi.org/classifiers/) in your `pyproject.toml`.

(python-package-distribution-git)=
### Git

You can get started by distributing your library as a Python package with very little friction using GitHub.
This is good for prototyping, or when first transitioning from a charmcraft-style library to a Python package,
and may be a good fit for libraries that are intended for team-internal use.
If your library is intended for external users, consider whether PyPI would be a better choice.

> You’ll need to include `git` in your charm’s build dependencies to use a GitHub-hosted library in your charm:

Reviewer 2: I think this would be fine, as the context should be clear from the section title and previous paragraph.

```suggestion
You’ll need to include `git` in your charm’s build dependencies:
```

```yaml
parts:
  charm:
    build-packages: [git]
```

> Then you can specify the dependency in your requirements like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then you can specify the dependency in your requirements:
```

```
charmlibs-pathops @ git+https://github.com/canonical/charmtech-charmlibs@main#subdirectory=pathops
```

You can specify any branch, tag, or commit after the `@`.
If you leave it off, it will default to `@main`.
You can’t specify a version range.
This can make dependency resolution problematic for users,
especially if your library is depended on by other charm libraries.
Tools that scan versions for security vulnerabilities may also struggle with such dependencies.

If your package is in a subdirectory of your repository,

> for example in a monorepo (like `charmlibs-pathops`),

Reviewer 3: Probably want to update the example name.

Author: ```suggestion
for example in a monorepo (like the example above),
```

or when developing libraries alongside charms,
you'll need to specify the subdirectory.
If your library has a dedicated repository,
leave off the subdirectory and it will default to the repository root.

> In `pyproject.toml`, quote the entire string above in your dependencies list,
> or use `uv add git+...` to have `uv` add `charmlibs-pathops` to your dependencies list,
> and the git referece to `tool.uv.sources`.
> For `poetry` see [here](https://python-poetry.org/docs/dependency-specification/#git-dependencies).

Reviewer 2: I had to read this a couple of times to fully understand. How about this:

```suggestion
In `pyproject.toml`, quote the entire string starting `charmlibs-pathops @ git+...` in your dependencies list.
Alternatively, use `uv add git+...` to have `uv` add `charmlibs-pathops` to your dependencies list and the git reference to `tool.uv.sources`.
For `poetry` see [the `poetry` docs](https://python-poetry.org/docs/dependency-specification/#git-dependencies).
```

> For `poetry` see [here](https://python-poetry.org/docs/dependency-specification/#git-dependencies).

Reviewer 3: It's best to avoid using words like "here" as link anchors (for accessibility for example).

the git commit fully specifies the contents of both your charm code and the package.
For example, if you had the following structure:

```
$repo/
    $charm/
        src/charm.py
        pyproject.toml
    $package/
        src/charmlibs/$libname/__init__.py
        pyproject.toml
```

Then you could leave `$package` out of your `$charm/pyproject.toml` during development.
When it comes time to pack `$charm` for release or integration testing, you could do something like this:

```bash
cd $repo
cp -r ./$charm ./pack-$charm
cp -r ./$package ./pack-$charm/
cd ./pack-$charm
uv add ./$package
charmcraft pack
```

To provision virtual environments for development (including linting and unit testing) we can use editable installs.
For a `$repo` wide virtual environment for conveniently working on both `$package` and `$charm`, you could do this:
```bash
cd $repo
uv venv
uv pip install -e ./$charm -e ./$package
```
Using editable installs ensures that the virtual environment reflects all changes made to either `$charm` or `$package`.
You can then point your editor to the python interpreter in `.venv`, or [activate it manually](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html#how-venvs-work).

> To create a virtual environment with a specific python version, use the `--python` flag or define it in a `$repo` level `pyproject.toml`.

Reviewer 2: I'd probably break the paragraph before "To create"

```suggestion

To create a virtual environment with a specific python version, use the `--python` flag or define it in a `$repo` level `pyproject.toml`.
```
